¶ ¶
SUE AIKENS: THIS IS HOW I
STORE MY WATER FOR THE WINTER.
I FILL UP MY
LITTLE BARRELS.
I HAVE ROUGHLY 300 DAYS OF
WINTER THAT I HAVE NO RUNNING
WATER BEFORE THE
RIVER STARTS BREAKING UP AND
IT'S CLEAR ENOUGH
THAT I CAN PUMP AGAIN.
I GIVE MYSELF ROUGHLY
ONE GALLON OF WATER PER DAY.
BASICALLY, I'M HOVERING
RIGHT ABOVE DEHYDRATION.
AND I GET NINE
MONTHS OF WINTER AND
I'M HALFWAY THROUGH THAT.
AND IF YOU LOOK
AROUND, I'VE GOT ROCKS.
YOU'VE GOT A
REALLY DIRTY PRODUCT.
IT'S NOT GOOD
FOR DRINKING.
BUT YOU CAN SEE ALL
MY BRUSH HANGING UP.
WHAT I'M NOT
GETTING IS SNOW.
THERE'S NO DRIFTING
GOING ON RIGHT NOW.
THAT'S WHAT I GET FOR MY
DRINKING AND MY WASHING WATER.
IT HAS ME CONCERNED.
THIS IS ONE OF THE MOST
VALUABLE RESOURCES I HAVE.
WATER IS THE GIFT OF LIFE.
I'VE GOTTA FIND IT.
¶ [THEME MUSIC PLAYS] ¶
TODAY I'M GONNA GO DOWN
A COUPLE OF PLACES THAT I
USUALLY, EVERY WINTER,
HAVE SOME OPEN LEADS,
AND SEE IF I CAN GET
GOOD, SAFE DRINKING WATER.
ALWAYS BRING MY
LITTLE BACKPACK.
I'VE GOT A SHOVEL THERE, I'M
ALSO GONNA USE IT FOR THE SNOW.
I CAN GET IN THE ARGO.
IF I GET TOO COLD, I HAVE A
QUICK LITTLE STOVE THAT I CAN
TAKE SNOW, MELT IT,
MAKE MYSELF A CUP OF
SOMETHING TO DRINK.
I GOT LITTLE SNACKS.
EXTRA GLOVES.
OUT HERE, TEMPERATURE
CHANGES ARE PRETTY AMAZING,
AND THEY HAPPEN
WITH NO NOTICE,
SAME WITH THE
BLIZZARDS THAT COME IN.
THIS IS WHERE, DOWN
HERE IS WHERE I GET
MY WATER IN THE SUMMER.
IT BEHOOVES ME TO
JUST LOOK AND SEE.
IF I HAVE AN OPEN LEAD
RIGHT HERE, PROBLEM SOLVED.
THEN I DON'T HAVE TO RUIN
A WHOLE DAY DOING SOMETHING.
BUT LET'S SEE WHAT
I'M DEALING WITH HERE.
COMING DOWN, ALL'S
I DID WAS DRIVE OVER IT,
AND I'VE GOT GRAVEL SHOWING.
YOU CAN SEE, THIS IS ONE
OF THE AREAS HERE, THAT I WILL,
EVERY YEAR HAVE
SNOW AND SNOW DRIFTS.
VERY LITTLE SNOW AND
PRECIPITATION COMING DOWN
THIS WINTER, BUT WE
DID BOTTOM OUT, FORTY,
FIFTY BELOW ZERO
FOR TWO, THREE WEEKS.
WHAT DOES THAT DO
TO YOUR WATER TABLE?
POPS IT TO SMITHEREENS.
YEAH, DEFINITELY
A SOURCE OF CONCERN.
THERE'S NOT
A CLEAN SOURCE.
A DEEP SOURCE.
I'VE GOTTA KEEP LOOKING.
GLENN VILLENEUVE: OUT HERE,
WE DON'T HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT
INSURANCE COMPANIES.
IF I WANNA TAKE A
RISK, IT'S MY BUSINESS.
I CAN DO WHATEVER I WANT.
¶ ¶
FIRST THING I NEED TO DO
TODAY IS GET MYSELF SOME WATER.
I'M ALL OUT OF WATER.
I DON'T HAVE ANY
WATER TO DRINK RIGHT NOW.
IT'S BEEN A FEW
DAYS SINCE I OPENED UP
MY WATER HOLE
HERE IN THE ICE.
I KEEP IT BURIED IN
SNOW TO INSULATE IT.
THIS IS WHERE I GET ALL
MY WATER FOR DRINKING.
COOKING.
CLEANING.
BATHING.
DOING MY LAUNDRY.
FORTY BELOW ZERO.
COLD WEATHER TO GET WATER,
BUT THAT'S WHAT I GOTTA DO.
THERE WE GO.
NOW, I SHOULD BE
ABLE TO GET WATER.
ONCE I GET
THIS HOLE OPEN,
I HAVE ACCESS
TO UNLIMITED WATER.
I CAN TAKE AS MANY
BUCKETS OF WATER AS I WANT.
IF I MELT SNOW,
THAT TAKES A LOT OF TIME,
THAT TAKES A LOT OF ENERGY.
THAT'S TIME AND ENERGY
I DON'T HAVE OUT HERE.
IT'S A LOT OF
WORK LIVING OUT HERE,
JUST TO GET BASIC THINGS
LIKE WATER, AND HEAT, AND FOOD.
BUT LOOK AT THE
ENVIRONMENT I GET TO LIVE IN.
LOOK AT THE BEAUTY
I'M SURROUNDED BY.
THIS IS INCREDIBLE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF
THINGS TO SEE OUT HERE.
AND TONIGHT, THERE'S GONNA
BE SOMETHING SPECIAL IN THE SKY.
THERE'S GONNA BE A SUPERMOON.
THAT'S WHEN THE FULL
MOON IS A LITTLE CLOSER
TO THE EARTH THAN NORMAL.
AND IT'S BIGGER AND IT'S
BRIGHTER THAN AT OTHER TIMES.
I CAN'T WAIT TO SEE IT.
I LIKE THIS KIND OF JOB.
YOU KNOW, IN MODERN SOCIETY,
YOU DON'T GET A CHANCE TO DO
STUFF LIKE THIS.
OUT HERE,
IT'S MORE PRIMAL.
YOU GET TO REALLY
USE YOUR STRENGTH,
AND TAKE OUT
SOME AGGRESSION.
I MEAN, LOOK AT, IT'S
LIKE, MM, IT'S PERMANENT!
I HIT WATER.
YEAH!
AH, YEAH.
OH, LOOK AT THAT WATER.
THAT'S A BEAUTIFUL SIGHT.
AFTER I GET MY WATER TODAY,
I WANNA GET SOME
ICE FROM THIS AREA, TOO.
A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO,
I DUG A HOLE IN THE GROUND
TO USE AS A REFRIGERATOR.
IT WORKS REALLY WELL.
IT KEEPS MY FOOD COOLER.
BUT IN THE SUMMERTIME,
EVEN UNDERGROUND IT WARMS UP.
AFTER I GET MY WATER
OUT OF MY WATER HOLE HERE,
I WANNA TAKE PIECES
OF ICE FROM THE LAKE,
BRING THEM UP TO
MY REFRIGERATOR HOLE,
AND PUT THEM IN THERE.
THAT WAY, NEXT
SUMMER, WHEN IT WARMS UP,
THAT ICE UNDERGROUND
WILL KEEP MY FOOD COOL.
OKAY, I GOT MY WATER,
I'M GONNA BRING IT IN,
THEN I'M GONNA COME BACK
OUT AND GET MYSELF SOME ICE.
JESSIE HOLMES: I'VE PUSHED
IT ABOUT AS HARD AS YOU CAN UP
HERE, AND BEEN BLESSED
BY THE LORD TO SURVIVE.
[BARKING]
OVER HERE, I GOT THIS SLED
THAT I'VE BEEN LIMPING ALONG
FOR THE LAST TWO YEARS
FOR DOING MY WORKLOAD.
BUT IT'S KIND
OF JUST DESTROYED.
BARELY HANGING ON,
THE STANCHIONS ARE BREAKING.
FOR AS MUCH AS I USE THE SLED,
THIS ISN'T REALLY ACCEPTABLE.
TODAY, I'M GONNA
START FROM SCRATCH AND
START BUILDING A NEW SLED.
IT'S GONNA BE
GOOD FOR WORKING.
BUT IT'S ALSO GONNA BE
GOOD FOR TRAINING MY RACE DOGS.
NARRATOR: JESSIE HOLMES
DEVOTES HIS LIFE ALONG THE
NENANA RIVER TO TRAINING
AND RACING HIS SLED DOGS.
TO PREPARE THE DOGS FOR
RACES AND ENSURE HIS SURVIVAL
DURING WINTER, JESSIE USES THE
DOGS TO HAUL VITAL RESOURCES.
JESSIE HOLMES: I'M GONNA BUILD
A KIND OF A HYBRID SLED THAT I
CAN USE TO TRAIN MY RACE DOGS,
BUT I CAN ALSO HAUL HEAVY
LOADS WITH IT THAT I NEED TO
DO CONSTANTLY AROUND HERE TO
KEEP FIREWOOD SUPPLIED,
HAUL THINGS OUT TO CAMP,
TRAPPING, HUNTING.
I MEAN, THIS IS GONNA BE
THE SLED THAT CAN DO IT ALL.
FIRST THING I NEED TO DO
IS GATHER UP ALL MY MATERIALS.
I NEED TO GET SOME
WILLOWS FOR MY TOP STRINGERS,
SO I'M GONNA HEAD BACK INTO
THE WOODS AND DOWN THE SLOUGH
AND LOOK FOR
SOME NICE WILLOWS.
THIS IS A NICE PIECE.
SO, A DATE FOOTMARK
IS GETTING A LITTLE THIN,
BUT THAT MIGHT WORK.
THAT'S A PRETTY
GOOD PIECE ACTUALLY.
ONE OF THE MAIN THINGS
I'M LOOKING FOR IS THE CORRECT
DIAMETER THAT I CAN ACTUALLY
COUNT ON THAT WILL BEND.
WILLOW IS PRETTY STRONG WOOD.
A LOT OF THE PIECES THAT I'M
USING ON THE SLED ARE ALREADY
GONNA COST QUITE A BIT,
SO TRY TO USE WHATEVER I
GOT OUT HERE TO LOWER THE
PRICE OF BUILDING THIS THING.
ALL RIGHT, I GOT MY
WILLOWS FOR MY STRINGERS,
AND NOW I GOT TO GO OVER
AND DIG OUT SOME WHITE SPRUCE
LUMBER THAT I MILLED UP
THIS FALL WITH MY SAWMILL.
THE WHOLE REASON FOR GETTING
THIS THING SET UP IN THE FALL
IS SO I COULD USE
IT COME SPRINGTIME.
BUT I ALSO WANTED TO ENSURE
THAT I HAD SOME LUMBER WHEN I
NEED IT, AND RIGHT NOW
IS THE TIME WHEN I NEED IT.
AROUND HERE, IT ALL
GOES BACK TO THE TREES.
TREES PROVIDE THE WAY OF
LIFE THAT WE LIVE OUT HERE.
FROM HEATING THE HOUSE
TO BUILDING THE HOUSE,
FROM THE START OF THE
GROWING TREE TO THE BEGINNING
OF A SLED THAT CAN
PROVIDE ME WITH LOTS.
THAT'S PRETTY
COOL RIGHT THERE.
THAT'S THE KIND OF LIFE
I'M TRYING TO ACHIEVE OUT HERE.
ALL RIGHT, THAT'S AN
EXTRA PIECE THAN I NEED.
SO THAT GIVES ME PLENTY
OF PIECES TO WORK WITH HERE.
THAT I GOT
EVERYTHING ALL TOGETHER,
MY NEXT THING TO
MOVE ON TO IS STARTING
TO PUT THE BED TOGETHER.
ANDY BASSICH: I VALUE
HAVING PEOPLE IN MY LIFE,
BUT I ALSO
VALUE MY TIME ALONE.
AND I REALLY VALUE
MY TIME IN THE WILDERNESS.
OH, TOOPY.
WANNA BE A PACK DOG?
I KNEW YOU WOULD.
SUN'S JUST UP.
I'M PLANNING ON GOING OUT AND
PUTTING IN A WALKING TRAPLINE.
BASICALLY, THE YUKON RIVER
TAKES A GREAT BIG TURN LIKE
THIS AND I LIVE
ABOUT RIGHT HERE.
AND THERE'S A REALLY NICE
RIDGELINE THAT GOES ALL THE
WAY AROUND THIS BEND HERE.
SO, I WANNA MUSH
ALL THE WAY AROUND AND
PUT IN A BIG GIANT LOOP.
I'M PRETTY CONFIDENT
THAT THERE WILL BE MARTEN,
WOLVERINE, AND POSSIBLY
SOME LYNX ALONG THIS LINE.
NARRATOR: FOR ANDY BASSICH,
LIFE ALONG THE YUKON RIVER
REQUIRES HIM TO HARVEST THE
AREA'S RESOURCES TO ENDURE
EXTREME ARCTIC CONDITIONS.
IN DARK WINTER, ANIMAL
PELTS PROVIDE HIM WITH
CLOTHING FOR WARMTH,
AND INCOME TO BUY NECESSITIES,
SUCH AS GAS AND
PARTS FOR HIS MACHINERY.
WITH TEMPERATURES FALLING,
SECURING FUR IS URGENT.
ANDY BASSICH: FOR ME,
MARTEN IS A DOLLAR BILL.
BOTTOM LINE, YOU
DEFINITELY GOT TO MAKE SOME
KIND OF MONEY OUT HERE.
HUP.
THERE'S NO REASON TO GO OUT
IN THE WILDERNESS AND SUFFER.
IF YOU JUST PUT THE WORK IN
AND YOU PUT THE PLANNING IN,
LIFE OUT IN A
WILDERNESS ENVIRONMENT CAN BE
VERY SATISFYING, VERY
REWARDING, AND COMFORTABLE.
HUP-HUP.
YES, OOH, LET'S STOP HERE.
UP A LITTLE, UP A LITTLE.
GOOD BOYS.
BASICALLY, THE RIDGELINE
GOES THAT WAY AND THAT WAY.
I'M GONNA HEAD OFF IN
THIS DIRECTION TO THE NORTH,
AND IT'LL MAKE A GIANT LOOP,
AND SEE IF I CAN DO THIS
BEFORE IT GETS TOO DARK.
IF NOT, IT'S
GONNA BE A COLD NIGHT.
TOPAZ GETS A PACK.
MAKE THIS A LITTLE LONGER,
'CAUSE YOU PUT ON WEIGHT!
YOU'RE A FAT GIRL NOW!
I'LL PROBABLY PUT
ICEBERG ON THE PACK,
'CAUSE HE LISTENS
A LITTLE BETTER.
KRUG, I THINK YOU'RE
GONNA LUCK OUT, BUDDY.
MAYBE YOU CARRY THE PACK
ON THE SECOND HALF, BUDDY.
COME ON, BOYS.
BERGY, TOPAZ, KRUG!
I LIKE IT, THESE LITTLE
CLUSTERS OF TREES LIKE THIS IS
ALWAYS A GOOD PLACE.
FORMS A NATURAL BARRIER AND
DOESN'T SNOW IN YOUR TRAPS.
PRIMARILY
FOR TRAPPING MARTEN,
I USE A POLE SET
WHERE I CUT A POLE.
I USUALLY STICK 'EM DOWN
IN THE TUNDRA AND THAT HELPS,
MAKE ROOM IN PLACE.
COME HERE, BERGY.
I NEED SOME BAIT
AND NAILS, BUDDY.
YOU'RE THE
BAIT AND NAIL GUY.
NAIL IT TO A TREE.
WIRE MY TRAP ON REAL GOOD.
TAKING SOME WHOLE SALMON.
MOST OF THE TIME I HANG 'EM
ON A PIECE OF WIRE LIKE THIS.
AND THEN, THEY'RE
THERE YEAR AFTER YEAR.
I DON'T HAVE TO
REDO THOSE EVERY YEAR.
THIS IS JUST A MARTEN
LURE AND SOME SHELLFISH OIL.
THIS CREATES A SCENT
WHICH HOPEFULLY WILL
DRAW THE MARTEN IN.
JUST PUT A
LITTLE BIT OF THIS.
OOH, THAT SMELLS
REALLY NICE AND STINKY.
THINK THIS IS
MADE OUT OF SOME OF THE
ANAL GLANDS OF THE MARTEN.
FINGERS ARE
ALREADY PRETTY COLD AND
I'M JUST GETTING STARTED.
I GOTTA GET MOVING
TO WARM UP A LITTLE BIT.
COME HERE, BOYS!
WE'RE OFF TO THE RACES.
SUE AIKENS: THE LEVEL OF
COMFORT I ENJOY IN MY LIFE IS
ABSOLUTELY DIRECTLY
RELATED TO HOW HARD I'VE
WORKED TO ATTAIN IT.
NARRATOR: AN UNUSUALLY WARM
WINTER IN KAVIK HAS PRODUCED
LOW AMOUNTS OF SNOW
AND DRASTICALLY REDUCED
SUE AIKEN'S WATER SUPPLY.
WITHOUT RUNNING
WATER UNTIL SPRING,
SHE MUST FIND A
LEAD OR DRIFTS IN ORDER TO
GET BY UNTIL
THE RIVER OPENS UP.
SUE AIKENS: MAYBE I'LL FIND
A GREAT DRIFT HALF A MILE THIS
WAY AND THAT WILL
SOLVE MY WHOLE ISSUE.
IF NOT, I DO HAVE SOME SKIS.
I CAN GET ON MY SKIS,
MAYBE DROP INTO THE RIVER
AND SEE WHAT'S THERE.
LOOK FOR OPEN LEADS.
AN OPEN LEAD OR A HUGE
DRIFT IS GONNA BE MY FRIEND.
ALL RIGHTY.
I'VE GOT SOME PRETTY
BIG TRACK DOWN HERE,
BUT I HAVE NO OPEN WATER.
I'M LOOKING FOR THE
DRIFTS, THERE ARE NONE.
YEAH, I HAVE EVERY RIGHT
TO BE MORE CONCERNED NOW.
I ENJOY DOING THIS.
IT'S A DAY OUT OF CAMP.
IT'S A DAY TO
PLAY IN THE SNOW.
WHO THE HELL
DOESN'T LIKE THAT?
(BLEEP).
SUE AIKENS: (BLEEP).
I'M (BLEEP) STUCK.
ALL RIGHT, WELL,
LITTLE RED SAID,
"NO, MY TINY SUMMER TIRES
JUST CAN'T GET ANY MORE TREAD."
WHAT I'M GONNA DO
IS GET THE SHOVEL,
AND GET LITTLE RED DUG OUT,
GET HIM BACK THAT DIRECTION.
AND WHAT I'M JUST
GONNA DO IS TRY TO GET
SOME OF THIS SNOW MOVED.
AND YOU CAN KIND OF SEE,
IT HIGH-CENTERS ITSELF.
BUT I'M HITTING
THE GROUND ALREADY.
IT'S JUST THAT,
IT'S JUST THAT MUCH.
TWO, THREE
INCHES TOO DEEP.
YOU CAN LAY ALL YOUR PLANS
IN AND MOTHER NATURE WILL TAKE
YOU RIGHT DOWN TO
YOUR KNEES IN A HEARTBEAT.
NOT EMOTIONAL, DOESN'T GIVE
A (BLEEP), IT'S NOT PERSONAL.
YOU'RE GONNA BE TAKEN
DOWN AND CRYING FOR MAMA.
THAT'S JUST WHAT
IT IS TO LIVE OUT HERE.
WELL, LET'S GET IN AND SEE
IF I CAN'T JOSTLE IT AROUND.
¶ ¶
LITTLE RED IS JUST
HAVING TOO MUCH TROUBLE
WITH THE SUGAR SNOW.
IT'S PADDLING THROUGH IT,
BUT THE MINUTE IT GETS DEEP,
IT'S GETTING HIGH-CENTERED,
SO IT'S NOT WORTH
BREAKING THE VEHICLE.
I HAVE SOME SKIS.
GET SOME MINIMAL TOOLS,
THEN POKE ALONG AND SEE IF I CAN
ORPHAN ANNIE MY
WAY OUT THERE AND SEE IF
I CAN FIND LIQUID WATER.
I'VE GOT MY TOTES WITH
MY GEAR INSIDE THAT I WANT.
GOT MY SHOVEL.
DON'T HAVE A WAIST HARNESS,
BUT I GOT A GUN BELT,
SO THAT'S HOW I'M
ATTACHING MYSELF.
BUT I WANNA GET GOING.
I CAN LIVE WITHOUT
EVER DOING THE RUNWAY.
EVER CLEANING THE PAD.
I CAN LIVE
WITHOUT ELECTRICITY.
A BODY CAN'T
LIVE WITHOUT WATER.
ANDY BASSICH: CONFUCIUS
ONCE SAID THAT A MAN WHO
LOVES HIS WORK NEVER
WORKS A DAY IN HIS LIFE,
AND THAT'S KIND
OF THE WAY MY LIFE IS.
THIS LOOKS LIKE
A GOOD SPOT FOR A SIT.
I'VE ONLY GOT MAYBE
AN HOUR OF DAYLIGHT LEFT,
SO I DON'T THINK
I'M GONNA MAKE THE WHOLE
LOOP IN ONE DAY.
NARRATOR: ANDY IS
TRAPPING FOR MARTEN,
AN ANIMAL THAT WILL PROVIDE
VALUABLE FUR FOR CLOTHING AND
TRADE IN DARK WINTER.
ANDY BASSICH:
BREAKING A NEW LINE OUT,
YOU REALLY NEVER KNOW
HOW LONG IT'S GONNA TAKE.
YOU KIND OF
BUSHWHACK THROUGH THE WOODS,
TRY AND NAVIGATE THE BEST YOU
CAN WHEN YOU'RE IN THE WOODS,
AND IT JUST
TAKES A LONG TIME.
SO FAR,
I'M DOING PRETTY GOOD.
I'M MAKING OKAY TIME.
IT ALWAYS TAKES LONGER
THAN YOU THINK WHEN YOU'RE
GOING THE FIRST
TIME AND MAKING TRAPS.
THERE'S THE TRAP.
OKAY, BOYS.
EVERYBODY COME, COME.
¶ ¶
WHAT I WANNA DO ABOUT EVERY
50 YARDS OR SO IS I LIKE JUST
TAKING ALL THE LIMBS OFF OF
A TREE LIKE THIS, SMALL TREE,
PUTTING A BLAZE
ON BOTH SIDES OF IT.
THIS BLAZE WILL GET COVERED
WITH SAP NEXT SPRING.
IT TURNS KIND OF A
REAL GOLDEN YELLOW COLOR
AND THAT SHOWS
UP PRETTY GOOD.
SO, THIS IS KIND OF LIKE
PUTTING THE BREADCRUMBS ON
THE TRAIL, SO
YOU CAN FOLLOW YOUR,
GET YOUR WAY HOME AGAIN.
YEAH!
WE'RE CRACKING.
STARTING TO GET A LITTLE BIT
LATE AND I GOTTA LOOK FOR A
PLACE TO CAMP FOR THE NIGHT.
WE GOT REALLY SHORT HOURS
OF DAYLIGHT THIS TIME OF YEAR.
ONCE IT'S DARK, IT'S
BEST JUST TO HUNKER DOWN,
WAIT IT OUT UNTIL YOU
GET A LITTLE BIT OF LIGHT,
'CAUSE YOU CAN GET LOST
IN THESE WOODS REAL QUICK.
HEY, HERE'S A
GOOD DEAD TREE, BERGY.
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
YOU READY TO STOP
FOR THE NIGHT?
WHOA, LOOK AT THAT, I
COVERED YOU UP WITH SNOW.
OH, KRUG,
YOU'RE ALL SNOWED IN.
I'M GONNA MAKE A
BED OF BOUGHS FIRST,
AND THEN I'LL
BUILD MY FIRE.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO BE FANCY,
IT JUST HAS TO KEEP ME OFF THE
GROUND A LITTLE BIT.
I'M NOT GONNA SAY I'M
GONNA BE COMFORTABLE ALL NIGHT.
I THINK IT WAS THE FIRST
WINTER I HAD A THREE-DOG TEAM.
I RAN OUT OF DAYLIGHT,
DECIDED I WOULD JUST CRAWL UP
UNDER A TREE
AND SPEND THE NIGHT.
I BUILT A FIRE, BUT
AT FORTY FIVE BELOW ZERO,
UNLESS YOU'RE
SITTING ON TOP OF THE FIRE,
IT REALLY DOESN'T
DO A LOT OF GOOD.
I HAD PROBABLY ONE
OF THE COLDEST NIGHTS
I'VE EVER HAD IN MY LIFE.
SOON AS THE LIGHT GOT JUST
A LITTLE BIT BRIGHT OUTSIDE,
I PACKED UP AND HEADED BACK.
YOU JUST LEARN WHEN YOU LIVE
OUT HERE TO TOLERATE A CERTAIN
AMOUNT OF BEING COLD.
I LOVE JUST THE EXPERIENCE
OF BEING IN THE WILDERNESS AND
CARVING OUT A PIECE OF THIS
WILDERNESS TO BE ABLE TO LIVE
THE KIND OF LIFE I WANNA LIVE.
WE'LL MAKE IT THROUGH
THIS NIGHT JUST FINE.
I'LL HAVE A NICE WARM BED
AND A HOT CUP OF COFFEE WAITING
FOR ME AT HOME.
THAT'S GOOD ENOUGH FOR ME.
JESSIE HOLMES: ULTIMATELY,
WHAT KEEPS YOU ALIVE OUT HERE
IS YOUR RESPECT FOR THE
ENVIRONMENT THAT YOU LIVE IN.
NOW IT'S TIME TO
START ASSEMBLING THE BED.
I GOT MY MATERIALS TOGETHER.
NARRATOR: IN NENANA, JESSIE
IS BUILDING A HYBRID SLED THAT
WILL ALLOW HIM TO HAUL VITAL
RESOURCES TO SURVIVE DARK
WINTER, AND TRAIN HIS
SLED DOGS FOR UPCOMING RACES.
JESSIE HOLMES: I WANNA
USE THIS SLED FOR WORK,
BUT I ALSO WANNA USE
IT FOR A TRAVELING SLED.
THAT'S THE, HONESTLY,
THAT'S THE MAIN PURPOSE TO
ME THAT I SEE FOR THIS
SLED IS A MULTIUSE SLED.
IT'S GONNA BE A
VERY LIGHT SLED,
WHICH IS GONNA BE PRETTY COOL
FOR HOOKING 16, 20 DOGS UP TO.
WELL, IT'S
LOOKING LIKE A SLED,
BUT IT'S STILL
A LONG PROCESS AWAY.
JUST 'CAUSE I GOT
THIS ALL CLAMPED DOWN,
I STILL GOT A LOT
OF FIGURING TO DO.
THIS IS WHAT'S GONNA
LOCK THE FRONT OF MY SLED
TOGETHER TO WHERE
IT CAN'T COME APART.
THIS IS DEFINITELY
THE HARDEST PART,
'CAUSE YOU GOTTA
KEEP EVERYTHING EXACT.
THINK I'M RUNNING A
LITTLE BIT LATE FINDING WHAT
I WANTED TO
DO WITH MY LIFE.
AND NOW THAT I'VE
FOUND WHAT I WANNA DO,
I FEEL A
LITTLE BIT BEHIND.
I FEEL LIKE I GOTTA
MAXIMIZE ON MY YOUTH.
I'M 34 YEARS OLD AND I'M
KIND OF IN MY PRIME RIGHT NOW.
SO, I REALLY
CAN'T WASTE TIME.
OKAY, TIME TO
BRING THE WILLOWS IN.
IT'S GONNA TIE IN THE
TOP STANCHIONS ALL TOGETHER.
WE CALL IT A STRINGER.
I GOTTA STAY WARM, I
GOTTA KEEP HOT WATER ON
FOR ME AND THE DOGS
ON THE STOVE CONSTANTLY.
GETTING THIS SLED DONE, SO I
CAN HAUL FIREWOOD IS CRITICAL.
ALL RIGHT, ALL THE MAJOR
WORK IS DONE ON THE SLED.
IT'S TIME FOR THIS SLED TO SEE
THE SNOW FOR THE FIRST TIME.
THERE'S A FEW THINGS I'M GONNA
HAVE TO ROB OFF MY RACING SLED,
WHICH LUCKLILY HAS THE SAME
STYLE OF ALUMINUM RUNNERS.
I FORGOT TO GET
FOOTPADS FOR IT.
AT LEAST WITH THE HYBRID,
IT CAN WORK JUST AS GOOD FOR
TRAINING THE RACE
DOGS AS I COULD WITH THIS,
AND I CAN HAUL MORE, SO.
WITH COLD COMES ALL
KINDS OF CHALLENGES.
CAN'T DEAL
WITH THE COLD,
THEN YOU JUST CAN'T
DEAL WITH LIVING UP HERE.
UNLESS YOU'RE GONNA LIVE
IN THE CITY AND GO RIGHT FROM
YOUR WARM CAR TO YOUR
WARM BUILDING, YOU KNOW?
I GOT THIS.
RIGHT HERE IS
SOMETHING I CAN'T STAND ON.
WITH THESE WHITE BOOTS
THAT KEEP ME WARM IN THESE
TEMPERATURES, THEY'LL SLIDE
RIGHT OFF AND THESE ARE WHAT'S
GONNA GIVE ME THE TRACTION.
WELL, I'M TRYING TO GET THE
LITTLE SLIDING NUTS OUT HERE.
AND IT'S PRETTY ICED UP
IN HERE FROM GOING THROUGH
OVERFLOW, (BLEEP) NOT
WORKING OUT FOR ME (BLEEP),
DAMN IT, (BLEEP).
ALWAYS SOMETHING,
MAN, WHEN IT'S COLD.
WISH I HAD THOUGHT
ABOUT THIS AHEAD OF TIME.
COULD HAVE SAVED
MYSELF SOME TIME.
I GOT TO GET THIS THING
INSIDE AND GET IT THAWING OUT.
EVERYTHING'S JUST A DIFFICULTY
WHENEVER IT'S 40 BELOW.
LUCKILY, I GOT PLENTY
OF OTHER STUFF I CAN BE
DOING ON THE SLED.
GLENN VILLENEUVE: I DON'T
GET BUMMED OUT ABOUT THINGS.
JUST TAKE WHAT
COMES IN LIFE.
I GOT MY WATER.
NOW IT'S TIME
TO GET SOME ICE.
THIS IS AN ICE SAW.
IT'S A NEW TOOL FOR ME.
I HAVEN'T
USED IT BEFORE.
I GOT TO TRY IT OUT.
I'M NOT SURE
HOW IT'S GONNA WORK.
IT'S SO COLD OUT HERE.
IT'S 43 BELOW ZERO.
THERE'S ALREADY
A LAYER OF ICE.
IT JUST TAKES A FEW
MINUTES TO FREEZE OVER.
I WANNA GET A LOT OF
ICE FROM THE LAKE HERE AND
I WANNA TAKE IT UP TO A
HOLE I HAVE IN THE GROUND.
A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO,
I DUG A REFRIGERATOR HOLE.
AND THAT REFRIGERATOR
HOLE ALLOWS ME TO KEEP
FOOD COOL IN
THE SUMMERTIME.
IF I PUT ICE IN THE HOLE,
IT'S GONNA WORK EVEN BETTER.
I SHOULD HAVE DONE
THIS JOB A WHILE AGO,
BUT I'VE BEEN SO BUSY
THAT I LET IT GO AND NOW
THE ICE IS
GETTING REALLY THICK.
I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S
TOO THICK FOR ME TO CUT WITH
THIS SAW OR NOT.
I'LL FIND OUT.
IT'S NOT EASY.
THE ICE IS SO THICK.
BUT IT IS SAWING.
IT'S JUST TAKING
A LOT OF STRENGTH TO
CUT THROUGH THIS THICK ICE.
SOME PEOPLE USE A
CHAINSAW FOR A JOB LIKE THIS.
BUT THEN YOU PUT ALL KINDS
OF OIL AND JUNK IN YOUR WATER
THAT I DON'T WANT IN THERE.
THERE.
LOOK AT THAT.
I CAN PUSH IT DOWN.
LET ME TRY AND GET
IT INTO POSITION.
COME ON.
OOH, ALMOST.
HERE IT COMES.
YES, THERE IT IS.
NOW I STILL GOT TO GET
THAT OUT OF THE WATER.
WHEW.
OOH, THAT'S
A BIG CHUNK.
COME ON.
THIS MUST WEIGH
AT LEAST 100 POUNDS.
NOPE, TOO BIG.
GONNA HAVE TO GET A SLING.
WHOO, THAT WATER'S COLD.
MAYBE IF I
GET A ROPE UNDER IT,
GET IT AROUND THE BLOCK.
IT'S HARD TO SEE
WHAT'S HAPPENING.
ALMOST.
COME ON, THERE.
COME ON,
COME ON OUT OF THERE.
YES, COME ON.
OH, OH, IT'S SLIPPING.
ON, COME ON OUT OF THERE.
COME ON OUT OF THERE.
YES, COME ON.
OH, OH, IT'S SLIPPING.
DAMN, LOST IT.
OH, I WANT THIS BIG BLOCK.
IF I CAN GET A SECOND
LOOP AROUND IT TO BALANCE IT,
THEN I CAN PULL
WITH TWO HANDS,
I MIGHT BE ABLE TO
POP IT OUT OF THE HOLE.
HMM, I DON'T KNOW
IF THIS IS GONNA WORK.
LET'S SEE.
IF I CAN GET A SECOND
LOOP AROUND IT TO BALANCE IT,
THEN I CAN PULL
WITH TWO HANDS,
I MIGHT BE ABLE TO
POP IT OUT OF THE HOLE.
IT'S A HUGE BLOCK OF ICE.
IT'S HARD TO GET OUT,
BUT IF I DO GET IT,
THINK OF HOW LONG THAT'LL
KEEP MY REFRIGERATOR COOL.
THERE ARE OTHER ALTERNATIVES.
FOR YEARS, I'VE LIVED
WITHOUT BIG BLOCKS OF ICE.
I JUST DIDN'T
HAVE REFRIGERATED FOOD.
YOU CAN LIVE ON DRY
FOOD IN THE SUMMER.
BUT WITH THIS,
IT'LL BE EASIER.
LIFE WILL BE A LITTLE
BIT EASIER NEXT SUMMER.
I'LL HAVE A REFRIGERATOR
THAT STAYS COOL LONGER.
I DON'T HAVE TO
HAVE A REFRIGERATOR.
I KNOW HOW TO
LIVE WITHOUT ONE.
BUT I WANT
A REFRIGERATOR.
OKAY, I HAVE IT.
ONE, TWO, THREE.
YES, I THINK I GOT IT.
ALMOST, COME ON,
DON'T FALL BACK IN THERE.
I DON'T WANNA UPSET IT.
IT MIGHT FALL BACK IN.
I GOT TO TAKE
MY TIME AND THINK.
OKAY, IT'S PARTWAY OUT.
I'M GONNA JUST TAKE MY
GLOVES OFF, USE MY BARE HANDS,
PUSH LIKE HELL.
OKAY, ONE, TWO, THREE.
I GOT IT,
YEAH, LOOK AT THAT.
THAT'S HUGE, WHOO.
THINK OF HOW LONG
THAT'S GONNA TAKE TO MELT.
WHEN I PUT THAT IN
A HOLE IN THE GROUND,
THAT'S GONNA LAST
A LONG, LONG TIME.
I GOT TO MOVE THIS BEFORE IT
FREEZES RIGHT IN PLACE HERE.
YEAH, I GOT IT.
THIS IS COOL.
LOOK AT THIS.
YEAH, MAYBE I'LL
TAKE UP ICE SCULPTURE.
OKAY, GOT A BLOCK OF ICE.
I'M GONNA MOVE IT UP
TO MY REFRIGERATOR HOLE,
PUT IT IN THERE,
ADD MORE ICE TO IT,
FILL IT ALL IN
GOOD AND THICK.
GOSH, I MIGHT HAVE
REFRIGERATION ALL NEXT SUMMER.
SUE AIKENS: YOU CAN GET BY
IN LIFE, OR YOU CAN LIVE LIFE.
ONE IS JUST
SITTING ON YOUR ASS,
AND THE OTHER
DENOTES GETTING OFF IT.
NARRATOR: IN KAVIK,
SUE'S SUPPLY OF DRINKING
WATER IS VANISHING.
UNABLE TO HAVE RUNNING
WATER UNTIL WINTER'S END,
SUE MUST SEARCH THE TUNDRA
TO SECURE A CLEAN WATER SOURCE
FOR HER SURVIVAL.
SUE AIKENS: I SEE LOTS
OF, LOTS OF FOXY TRACKS.
OH, WE'VE HAD A WOLF
COME THROUGH HERE, TOO.
WE GOT ACTIVITY.
YOU'VE GOT FOX
GOING AROUND HERE.
YOU'VE GOT ERMINE.
YOU GET A CIRCLE HERE.
THEY'VE SPLIT AND
GONE DIFFERENT AREAS.
THAT TELLS ME I'M NOT THE
ONLY ONE THAT'S NOTICING THAT
THERE'S A PROBLEM.
IF YOU ARE OBSERVANT
ENOUGH, NATURE WILL LET YOU
KNOW WHAT'S COMING AT YOU.
THIS IS THE RIVER.
AND I'M JUST
LOOKING, LOOKING.
I SEE A LITTLE SPOT
HERE MAYBE I WANNA CHECK OUT.
I'M GONNA GET OUT
INTO THE CHANNEL HERE,
SEE IF I CAN SEE ANY
EVIDENCE OF OVERFLOW.
YEP.
SEE, YOU
CAN HEAR THE ICE.
KIND OF A HOLLOW SOUND.
DON'T THINK THERE'S
ANY WATER UNDER THAT.
WE ALREADY
HAVE, ICY HERE.
I, THERE'S NO,
THERE'S NO WETNESS UNDER IT.
SO, THERE'S NO WATER
RUNNING ON THIS SECTION.
I GO OUT THIS WAY
A LITTLE FURTHER,
THERE'S ANOTHER CHANNEL.
I CAN CHECK
THE BACK CHANNEL.
I DON'T WANNA GO
FIVE, TEN MILES FROM CAMP.
THAT'S NOT THE GOAL.
GETTING YOUR WATER,
GETTING A RESOURCE,
WHEN I'M JUST GETTING READY
TO HEAD INTO THE WORST PART OF
THE DARKEST
PART OF MY YEAR,
YOU'RE A FOOL TO
MAKE IT TOO FAR AWAY.
I THINK I'M TOO
LATE ON THIS ONE,
DEFINITELY WATER
WAS RIGHT HERE.
BUT MY SUPER,
SUPER COLD TEMPERATURES,
ARE JUST CANNIBALIZING IT.
I'LL GO DOWN A
LITTLE BIT FURTHER,
SEE WHAT'S AROUND THIS EDGE.
IF IT'S NOT
AROUND THIS BEND,
IT'S NOT GONNA
BE ON THIS RIVER.
THIS DOESN'T FEEL SAFE.
IT'S GETTING HARDER TO
SEE, IT'S GETTING DARKER.
THE DARKER SURFACE,
THE CRYSTALLINE FORMATIONS.
WATER WAS HERE,
AND IT'S HOLLOW-ISH NOW.
THESE ARE THE
DEEPEST CHANNELS I HAVE.
IF I DON'T HAVE WATER
RUNNING UNDERNEATH THESE,
I DON'T HAVE WATER
RUNNING ON THE RIVER ANYMORE.
WE'RE AT THAT TWO-MILE
POINT FROM WHERE WE STARTED.
I'M NOT FINDING
ANY RUNNING WATER.
I NEED TO PUT UP
SOME KIND OF FENCING,
OR LOOK FOR AN AREA
THAT'S GONNA HAVE GOOD DRIFTING
BECAUSE THAT'S GONNA
BE KEY FOR ME TO GET GOOD,
SAFE DRINKING WATER.
IT IS GETTING DARKER.
I THINK THE ONLY THING
THAT I CAN DO IS GET BACK
TO LITTLE RED, PUT MY
STUFF AWAY, GET HOME, REGROUP,
AND GET THE
DRIFT FENCING DONE.
ANDY BASSICH: WE
LIVE SEASON-TO-SEASON.
WE DON'T LIVE
DAY-TO-DAY, OR WEEK-TO-WEEK.
WE LIVE BY THE SEASONS.
COME HERE, KRUG.
I'D SAY ON A SCALE OF
ONE TO TEN, THIS WAS,
TEN BEING A VERY COMFORTABLE
NIGHT AND ZERO BEING A VERY
UNCOMFORTABLE NIGHT,
THIS WAS ABOUT A FOUR.
NARRATOR: AFTER SETTING TRAPS
FOR MARTEN AND SPENDING A
NIGHT ON THE GROUND IN
FREEZING COLD TEMPERATURES,
ANDY IS CONTINUING
HIS SEARCH FOR VITAL FUR.
ANDY BASSICH: I KNOW I CAME
IN FROM OVER HERE SO I GOT TO
MOVE IN THIS DIRECTION.
OH, ARE YOU GONNA
TAKE OVER MY BED?
SHE SAYS, "HOW COME YOU
DIDN'T MAKE ONE OF THESE
FOR ME LAST NIGHT?"
OH, GOT A SQUIRREL.
WELL, YOU CAN'T
CATCH MARTEN IF YOU GOT A
SQUIRREL IN THE TRAP.
SOMETIMES, WHEN
YOU'RE TRAPPING MARTEN,
YOU'RE IN THE SAME
COUNTRY THE SQUIRRELS ARE IN.
THE SQUIRRELS GET
INTO THE TRAPS, SO, YOU KNOW,
I CAN SKIN THIS GUY OUT, AND
IF I GET ABOUT 30,000 OF THEM,
I MIGHT BE ABLE TO
MAKE SOMETHING WITH IT.
JUST GOT TO KEEP
TRYING THINGS OUT HERE.
THAT'S JUST THE
WAY THE LIFE IS.
YOU JUST COME UP WITH
A PLAN, MAKE IT HAPPEN,
AND THEN ADAPT.
THE ONLY BAD MISTAKE OR
FAILURE IS ONE THAT KILLS YOU.
ALL THE OTHER
ONES ARE GOOD BECAUSE
THEY TEACH YOU SOMETHING.
WELL, I'M UP ON
THE HILLSIDE HERE,
AND THERE'S A SET OF MARTEN
TRACKS COMING UP THE HILL.
THERE ARE MARTEN
IN THE COUNTRY,
THEY'RE JUST
NOT IN MY TRAP.
WHAT WE GOT, TOOP?
WE GOT SOMETHING?
OH, SHOOT,
ANOTHER SQUIRREL.
WE WANT MARTENS.
THAT JUST CLOGS YOUR TRAP
UP WHEN YOU CATCH THESE GUYS.
THAT'S NO GOOD.
ALL RIGHT, LET'S
GET GOING, BOYS.
YEAH, I
REMEMBER THIS TREE.
I'M GETTING CLOSE
TO MY LAST TRAP NOW.
I GUESS I'M AT MY LAST
CHANCE TO PICK SOMETHING UP,
SEE WHAT HAPPENS.
COME ON, BOYS.
OH, YOU'RE SEEING
SQUIRREL TRACKS, HUH?
LOOKS LIKE A BUST.
BIG GOOSE EGG.
NO MARTEN.
SOME SQUIRRELS.
SO A LOT OF WORK,
A COLD NIGHT OUT,
NOT VERY PRODUCTIVE FOR
THE EFFORT I PUT INTO IT,
BUT I'M NOT GIVING UP.
IT'S STILL EARLY.
IT'S ONE CHECK OUT
OF HOPEFULLY MANY.
IT'S ABOUT 30
BELOW ZERO OUT.
ANIMALS DON'T MOVE MUCH
WHEN IT STARTS GETTING 30,
40 BELOW ZERO, SO I'M
HOPING THAT WE GET A LITTLE
WARM SPELL, THE ANIMALS WILL
COME OUT OF THAT COLD SPELL,
WANNA EAT, AND
IT'LL BE HUNGRY,
AND I'M HOPING IT'LL
START TO PRODUCE WHEN IT
WARMS UP A LITTLE BIT.
HAW, HAW.
KRUGGER AND, HAW.
KRUG, HAW.
ATTABOYS.
THAT'S THE WAY
IT GOES UP HERE.
SOMETIMES YOU PUT
A LOT OF WORK,
A LOT OF EFFORT INTO SOMETHING
AND IT DOESN'T PAY OFF.
IF NOTHING ELSE, I KNOW
THAT I'VE GOT A LINE UP HERE,
AND LOOKS LIKE THIS TIME I'M
GONNA HAVE TO BE PATIENT FOR
THIS TO PAY OFF.
OKAY, THERE YOU GO.
LIVING OUT HERE, YOU JUST
ACCEPT WHAT COMES YOUR WAY AND
DO THE BEST YOU CAN TO
KEEP ON PLUGGING THROUGH IT.
JESSIE HOLMES: OUT HERE,
I'M WORKING FOR MYSELF,
NOT FOR SOMEBODY ELSE.
I'M WORKING
TOWARDS MY OWN GOALS.
TIME TO SEE IF
HE'S THAWED OUT GOOD.
SHOULD HAVE.
IT'S BEEN NICE
AND WARM IN THE CABIN.
LOOKS LIKE IT THAWED OUT.
THERE YOU GO.
THESE ARE THE LAST PARTS I
NEED TO ATTACH MY FOOTPADS,
AND I GOT
SOMETHING TO STAND ON.
NARRATOR: JESSIE IS IN THE
FINAL STAGES OF BUILDING A
HYBRID SLED, A CRUCIAL
TOOL TO HAUL RESOURCES AND
TRAIN HIS DOGS DURING WINTER.
JESSIE HOLMES: GOT MY FOOTPADS
ON, EVERYTHING'S READY TO GO.
JUST GOT TO GET
THE CHAINSAW LOADED UP,
AND HITCH THE DOGS UP,
AND HEAD OUT TO THE WOOD YARD.
ALL RIGHT BOYS,
ALL RIGHT, FLASH.
I GET TO PUT THIS
NEW SLED TO WORK.
REALLY EXCITED TO
SEE HOW IT'S GONNA GO.
LOOKS GREAT, BUT YOU CAN'T
TELL WHAT A SLED'S GONNA DO
UNTIL IT'S OUT
THERE ON THE TRAIL.
ALL RIGHT, HIKE.
STRAIGHT AHEAD,
STRAIGHT AHEAD.
ALL RIGHT, WHOA, WHOA.
STRAIGHT UP, STRAIGHT UP,
STRAIGHT UP, STRAIGHT AHEAD,
STRAIGHT AHEAD.
ALL RIGHT, BOYS.
HOP, HOP, HOP.
EASY, OH, WHOA.
JESSIE HOLMES:
STOP, STAY.
WELL, THIS
SLED'S A NICE RIDE.
IT HANDLES REALLY
GOOD, IT STEERS GOOD.
I'M JUST GONNA SEE IF IT
CAN HANDLE THE HEAVY WORKLOAD.
CAN'T REALLY GET THE DOGS
ANCHORED OFF TO ANYTHING,
SO I JUST DECIDED TO STOP
AND TURN THEM ALL LOOSE AND
LET THEM HANG OUT
WHILE I CUT WOOD.
LUCKILY, THEY'RE
REALLY WELL-TRAINED DOGS,
AND THAT'S WHERE THE
WORK YOU PUT INTO YOUR TEAM
PAYS OFF RIGHT THERE.
NOW TIME TO GET
UP THE BANK HERE AND
CUT A BUNCH OF
WOOD TO PUT IN IT.
WITH THE FIREWOOD,
IT'S A NEVER-ENDING THING.
GETTING THIS WOOD,
I'M GONNA WARM UP.
TAKING IT HOME, I'M
GONNA WARM UP, SPLITTING IT,
AND THEN IT'S GONNA WARM ME
UP WITH A GOOD WARM MEAL OFF MY
WOODSTOVE AND KEEP
MY CABIN NICE AND WARM.
THIS AIN'T A LIFESTYLE
FOR WEAK PEOPLE.
ALL RIGHT.
OH, YEAH, I'M
ECSTATIC WITH HOW GOOD
THIS SLED DID
COMING DOWN HERE.
NOW I'M GONNA PUT IT TO THE
TEST WITH A BIG LOAD OF WOOD.
IT'S A GOOD
COUPLE HUNDRED POUNDS.
GONNA BE SOME DAMN HARD
PULLING, I CAN TELL THAT.
IT'S ALL RIGHT, IT'S
JUST ANOTHER CHALLENGE ME
AND THE DOGS ARE GONNA
WORK THROUGH TOGETHER.
SOUNDS LIKE THEY'RE EXCITED
TO DO THIS WORK FOR ME THOUGH
AND THAT MAKES ME HAPPY.
THAT MUST MEAN THEY
LIKE THE NEW SLED.
ALL RIGHT, READY?
HIKE, HIKE.
GOOD BOYS, ALL RIGHT,
ALL RIGHT, ALL RIGHT, HAW.
STRAIGHT UP, STRAIGHT UP,
STRAIGHT UP, STRAIGHT AHEAD,
STRAIGHT AHEAD.
THERE YOU GO, ALL
RIGHT BOYS, GOOD JOB.
STRAIGHT AHEAD.
THESE DOGS ARE AMAZING, THEY
JUST PULLED THIS HEAVY LOAD OF
WOOD THROUGH THIS TWO-FOOT
DEEP POWDER SNOW ON THIS NEW
SLED THAT I BUILT.
I BRED THESE DOGS.
I BUILT THIS SLED.
THIS IS ME.
THIS IS WHAT I DO AND THIS
IS AN EXPRESSION OF WHO I AM.
I'M JESSIE HOLMES.
I'M THE MAN WHO
HAULS WOOD, BREEDS DOGS,
AND BUILDS HIS OWN SLEDS.
AND THAT'S A GOOD
MAN TO BE UP HERE.
STRAIGHT AHEAD.
SUE AIKENS: I MAY FLOUT
A LOT OF SOCIETY'S RULES,
BUT AS A SOCIETY
OF ONE I MAKE MY OWN.
SO LAST NIGHT, WHEN I
WAS OUT AND ABOUT AND SKIING,
I STARTED IN THE DAY,
ENDED UP WELL PAST NIGHT.
I DIDN'T FIND ANY
LIQUID WATER, THEREFORE,
I NEED TO GET THIS
DRIFT FENCING UP,
SO I CAN START FARMING
AND COLLECTING THE SNOWDRIFTS.
THIS IS DRIFT FENCING.
AND THE WHOLE
POINT OF THIS IS,
IMAGINE IT'S STUCK UPRIGHT,
THE WIND IS GONNA HIT THIS,
ALL THESE LITTLE BAFFLES
CREATE AN AREA FOR THE SNOW
THAT HITS IT, THE MILES
PER HOUR IT'S GOING SUDDENLY
DECREASES TO ALMOST NIL
AND IT DROPS ON THE OTHER SIDE.
YOU ARE ACTUALLY
GROWING SOMETHING.
YOU'RE GROWING
A DRIFT FOR WATER.
THIS IS A GREAT AREA.
THIS WAY OR THIS WAY,
DOESN'T MATTER WHICH WAY THAT
WIND'S GONNA COME,
NORTH OR SOUTH,
I'M GONNA
COLLECT THE DRIFT.
JUST KICKING THE
LENGTH OF THIS OUT.
AND I'M GONNA BE HEADING
TOWARDS THE BRUSH OVER HERE.
WHAT I'M GONNA DO IS
JUST KIND OF TACK IT ON HERE.
NOT ITS PERMANENT HOME,
BUT FOR THE TIME-BEING,
I JUST NEED TO GET
IT ATTACHED SOMEWHERE.
THERE WE GO.
I'M NOT FOOLING
MYSELF THAT I AM TAMING
MOTHER NATURE, NO WAY.
WHAT I'M TRYING TO
DO IS UTILIZE SOMETHING
THAT HAPPENS NATURALLY.
THE WIND, THE SNOW, THE COLD,
ALL HAPPENS NATURALLY HERE AND
I'M JUST GIVING
IT A PLACE AND MAKING IT
CONVENIENT FOR MYSELF.
I'M APPLYING YOU KNOW,
SCIENCE, KNOWLEDGE, AND HABIT.
I'VE DONE THIS BEFORE.
HAVEN'T HAD TO
DO IT FOR YEARS,
BUT WHY NOT USE WHAT
MOTHER NATURE LAYS OUT THERE?
MAKE IT A LITTLE TIGHTER.
ALL RIGHT, I'M
PRETTY HAPPY WITH IT.
I'VE NOW GOT A LONG STRETCH
THAT IS GOING TO EITHER SIDE,
BECOME A DRIFT TWO,
THREE TIMES THE FENCE.
I'VE TURNED IT INTO A
VIABLE OPTION FOR WATER FOR
THE REST OF THE WINTER.
NO MATTER HOW THE
REST OF THE WINTER GOES,
I'M GONNA BE USING MOTHER
NATURE ITSELF TO CREATE THE
WATER SOURCE I NEED.
THIS IS THE
STUFF THAT I CAME FOR.
THE OBSTACLES, THE
HARDSHIPS, THE CHALLENGES.
YOU TAKE WHAT LIFE THROWS
AT YOU AND YOU WORK WITH IT.
AND IF YOU DON'T LIKE IT,
WORK HARDER AND CHANGE IT.
GLENN VILLENEUVE: I DON'T
GET BUMMED OUT ABOUT THINGS.
I JUST TAKE
WHAT COMES IN LIFE.
RIGHT HERE, THIS IS
WHERE MY REFRIGERATOR HOLE IS.
SO, I JUST
GOT TO DIG IT OUT.
THERE, I GOT IT.
YEAH, LOOK IT, I GOT IT.
THIS IS MY REFRIGERATOR
HOLE RIGHT HERE.
THE FOOD GOES
IN THIS BARREL.
THAT PROTECTS IT FROM
RODENTS AND SCAVENGERS.
THERE'S SOME SPACE.
I DON'T KNOW IF MY
BLOCK WILL FIT, THOUGH.
I THINK IT'S
A LITTLE TOO BIG.
BUT AROUND THE BARREL,
IF I CAN FILL IT IN WITH ICE,
THINK OF THE COOLING POWER.
THAT BIG BLOCK OF
ICE DOWN IN THERE,
IT MIGHT BE A LITTLE BIG.
I'LL HAVE TO SHAVE
IT TO FIT, I THINK.
AND IF I CAN PUT ONE BIG
CHUNK HERE BEHIND THE BARREL,
THAT'LL LAST SO MUCH LONGER.
I'LL TRY TO PUT THE
BIGGEST CHUNK I CAN BACK
HERE BEHIND THE BARREL.
AND THEN SMALLER PIECES TO
FILL IN THE SPACES AND THEN
I'LL PROBABLY POUR
WATER IN THERE, TOO.
THIS SAW WORKS REALLY WELL.
I SHOULD HAVE GOT
ONE OF THESE YEARS AGO.
I WANNA BE ABLE TO SHAPE IT TO
FIT IN THERE MORE EFFICIENTLY.
I'LL BE ABLE TO PUT
THAT RIGHT IN THE BACK.
FILL UP A LOT OF
SPACE WITH ONE BIG CHUNK,
AND THEN FILL
IN ALL AROUND IT.
THERE.
OH, IF I COULD JUST GET
IT IN BESIDE THE BARREL.
IT'S HEAVY.
HERE IT GOES,
HERE IT GOES.
WHOA, YEAH, THIS IS NICE.
I CAN FILL IN THE
SPACES AROUND IT.
I GOT A REFRIGERATOR,
TOO, THAT'S GONNA
LAST ALL NEXT SUMMER.
I'M JUST FILLING
IN THE HOLES NOW.
OKAY, I GOT THE
ICE IN THERE FIRST,
NOW I'M FILLING
IN THE SPACES WITH SNOW.
AND THEN I THINK
I'LL POUR WATER IN,
AND THAT
WATER WILL FREEZE.
IT'S 40 BELOW ZERO, SO
THE WATER WILL FREEZE UP
AND IT'LL JUST
BE SOLID ICE IN THERE.
GOT MY REFRIGERATOR
ALL FIXED UP.
THIS IS GONNA BE
ONE GIANT MASS OF ICE.
WHEN NEXT SUMMER COMES,
THIS IS GONNA HELP
ME STORE FOOD A LOT LONGER.
I GOT MY JOBS ALL DONE,
AND IT'S STILL EARLY ENOUGH.
I CAN GO FIND A
GOOD PLACE TO WATCH THE
SUPERMOON RISE TONIGHT.
IT'S GONNA BE MANY YEARS
UNTIL THE MOON'S AS BIG AND
AS BRIGHT AS IT'S
GOING TO BE TONIGHT.
WHEN THAT MOON COMES UP,
IT'S GONNA BE SOMETHING.
I'M GONNA CLIMB UP ON THE
CACHE AND GET A GOOD VIEW.
THERE IT IS.
IT'S A LITTLE CLOSER TO
THE EARTH THAN THE FULL MOON
USUALLY IS, SO IT'S BRIGHTER,
AND IT'S A LITTLE BIT BIGGER.
IT CAN BE 14% BIGGER AND 30%
BRIGHTER THAN AT OTHER TIMES.
AT THIS TIME OF YEAR,
IT'S THE DEEPEST,
DARKEST PART OF WINTER.
I CAN'T SEE THE SUN ANYMORE,
BUT I CAN STILL SEE SUNLIGHT
REFLECTED OFF THAT MOON.
IT'S SO QUIET OUT HERE.
IF YOU JUST WANNA THINK,
YOU JUST WANNA MEDITATE,
YOU JUST WANNA TAKE SOME
TIME ALONE AND SPEND SOME TIME
IN PEACE AND QUIET, THERE'S
NOTHING LIKE IT OUT HERE.